File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 1 ---
Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements: 
A Reflection on Concepts and Theory in 
Comparative Fascist Studies
Tomislav Dulić 
Hugo Valentin Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
tomislav.dulic@valentin.uu.se
Abstract
Scholars have recently begun advocating for the application of social movement 
theory in the analysis of the rise and development of fascist political entities. While 
representing a welcome effort to increase the theoretical depth in the analysis of 
fascism, the approach remains hampered by conceptual deficiencies. The author 
addresses some of these by the help of a critical discussion that problematises the 
often incoherent ways in which the concept of ‘movement’ is used when describing 
fascist political activity both within and across national borders. The analysis then 
turns to the application of social movement theory to the historical example of the 
Ustašas. While recent research on social movements has begun to explore the role 
and character of transnationalism, this case study analysis suggests that the lack 
of supra-national organisations during the period of ‘classic’ fascism prevented 
the emergence of a ‘transnational public space’ where fascist movements could 
have participated. The conclusion is that rather than acting and organising on a 
‘transnational’ level, fascist entities appear to have limited themselves to state-based 
international ‘knowledge-transfer’ of a traditional type.
Keywords 
Croatia – fascism – social movements – transnationalism – Ustaša ( uhro)
In a recent article, Kevin Passmore argued for the need to use social move -
ment theory in the analysis of fascism. Departing from a critique of ‘generic 
© Tomislav DuliĆ, 2021 | doi:10.1163/22116257-10010008
This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the prevailing cc-by license at the time of 
publication.Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227
Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 2 ---
203
fascism’ , he rebuked scholars for straying from the study of fascism per se to 
analysing fascist practice in terms of institutional structures, symbolic actions, 
or violence. He also argued that scholars have applied an outdated approach 
to the analysis of these fascist movements, relying ‘unwittingly on understand-
ings of social action derived from late nineteenth-century crowd psychology, 
from which social movement theory has—in principle—liberated itself’.1 
According to Passmore, a more sophisticated application of social movement 
theory has the potential for a more dynamic approach that can better cap -
ture the nature and transformation of fascist movements on both national and 
transnational levels.2 At the same time and somewhat surprisingly, however, 
he dismissed efforts to ‘enter into the (irresolvable) debate about whether or 
not they actually were fascist or indeed whether or not they were social move -
ments’.3 Instead, he provided an analysis of the way fascists appropriated the 
concept ‘movement’ to seek legitimacy. While interesting, the approach also 
resulted in a lack of conceptual clarity that sometimes becomes confusing. In 
a reference to the Hungarian Arrow Cross, for instance, he argued ‘[t]he party 
was more genuinely a social movement than earlier far-right groups had been 
[my emphases]’.4
Notwithstanding the conceptual deficiencies, Passmore’s valuable impasse 
highlights issues that have not attracted enough attention in comparative fas -
cist studies. Does it make sense to define fascist entities as social or political 
movements? If so, can social movement theory help improve the analysis of 
how fascist entities emerge, develop and transform? What can we learn from 
recent advances in theory about transnational social movements when dis -
cussing fascist cross-border cooperation? This article represents an effort to 
explore these issues by using the Ustašas as an empirical example for a discus -
sion of the term ‘movement’ and its applicability to fascist entities, and also to 
explore fascist cross-border collaboration. The conclusion is that the Ustašas 
headed an organisation rather than a movement, which is likely to be also true 
1 Kevin Passmore, ‘Fascism as a Social Movement in a Transnational Context,’ in The History 
of Social Movements in Global Perspective: A Survey, ed. Stefan Berger and Holger Nehring 
(London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2017), 572.
2 Ibid.
3 Ibid., 583.
4 Ibid., 602. A similar problem can be found in Bauerkämper and Rossilinski-Liebe’s interesting 
Fascism Without Borders, where the former continuously refers to ‘movements and regimes’. 
Even though the authors do not provide a definition that can distinguish between movements 
and regimes, it seems all fascist organisations that are not regimes—in other words in 
control of a state apparatus—are defined as ‘movements’; Arnd Bauerkämper and Grzegorz 
Rossoliński, ed., Fascism Without Borders: Transnational Connections and Cooperation Between 
Movements and Regimes in Europe from 1918 to 1945 (New York: Berghahn Books, 2017), 11.
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 3 ---
204
for many other fascist entities that are regularly referred to as movements in 
the literature. Based on an empirical analysis of Ustaša activities in Yugoslavia, 
Italy, Hungary and Germany, I furthermore suggest that scholars revisit the 
concept of transnationalism, due to its strong association with late twenti-
eth-century globalisation processes and the emergence of a transnational pub -
lic space that one cannot easily find in interwar Europe.
The Concept of ‘Movement’ and its Use in Fascist Studies
The conceptual puzzle was first brought to my attention almost two decades 
ago when I noted the inconsistent manner in which the Ustašas referred to 
themselves and their role in Croatian society. Their official name was Ustaša—
Croatian Revolutionary Organisation [ uhro; Ustaša—Hrvatska revolucionarna 
organizacija]. However, already in some of the founding documents the Ustašas 
often referred to themselves as a movement ( pokret),5  a term that became dom-
inant in the Independent State of Croatia [ndh; Nezavisna Država Hrvatska]. 
The choice of terminology was not surprising, considering the character and 
activities of the uhro . It is in the raison d’être of fascist leaders and groups to 
portray themselves as representing ‘the People’ , in other words as an entity that 
transcends the body politic to embody a ‘popular will’. Parties and other organ-
isations, by contrast, speak on behalf of classes or other sub-groups within the 
national community, which means they are divisive and competitive in charac-
ter. Self-defining as a party therefore implies that one is merely representing one 
of many political alternatives, competing in a ‘market of ideas’ for the support 
of a constituency. Having gained power through a campaign of anti-democratic 
activities and collaboration with the Axis Powers, the Ustašas could therefore 
not style themselves as a ‘party’ , since that would contradict the very essence of 
fascism as an alternative to a supposedly dysfunctional democracy.
What I found intriguing was that many scholars referred to the uhro as a 
movement with little or no discussion of the conceptual and theoretical implica-
tions for doing so, while at the same time conceding they had few followers and 
were largely inactive in Yugoslavia during most of the interwar period.6  One can 
5 Nevenko Bartulin, The Racial Idea in the Independent State of Croatia: Origins and Theory, Vol. 4 
(Leiden: Brill, 2014), 127.
6 Fikreta Jelić-Butić belonged to the few Yugoslav scholars that showed an awareness of the 
problem by pointing out that the Ustašas use of the concept movement ‘should be understood 
only in the formal sense of the word’; Fikreta Jelić-Butić, Ustaše i NDH (Zagreb: SN Liber 
Školska knjiga, 1977), 8.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 4 ---
205
find a similar lack of conceptual stringency in comparative fascist studies, where 
the term ‘movement’ is used for an array of organisations.7  Sometimes, such as 
with the Finnish Lapuan liike [Lapua Movement], one can perhaps speak of the 
kind of network that signifies a movement.8  Defining the Norwegian Nasjonal 
Samling as a movement is less convincing, considering it was established as a 
political party in 1933 even before it had become ‘fascistised’.9  Similar problems 
exist insofar as more well-known fascists are concerned. While Mussolini’s Fasci 
d’Azione Rivoluzionaria may be considered a movement in its early stages, this is 
hardly the case with the Partito Nazionale Fascista ( pnf), which already in 1921 
‘aimed to redirect the movement’s activities to more conventional political and 
parliamentary activity’.10 The situation is clearer with the Nationalsozialistischer 
Deutsche Arbeiterpartei ( nsdap), which already in 1921 had a hierarchical organi-
sational structure and a 25-point party programme.11 Even after being banned in 
1923, the organisation continued its work as part of the Völkisch-Sozial Blok until 
coming to power in 1933. The Spanish Falange Española de las jons emerged as a 
fascist party in 1934 under a collective leadership comprising Ramiro Ledesma, 
7 This is a weak spot in Bauerkämper and Rossiliński-Liebe’s edited volume, where the authors 
argue that ‘[i]n conceptual terms, at least three dimensions of ‘transnational fascism’ are to 
be distinguished’ , none of them being whether or not we are dealing with movements or 
not, after which they intermittently refer to ‘fascist movements and regimes’; Bauerkämper 
and Rossoliński, Fascism Without Borders, 2, passim.
8 The movement emerged in 1929 as a reaction to communist activities and its ideology was 
characterised by extreme nationalism, anticommunism and its activities by frequent use of 
violence for political purposes. As a result of the violent activities and the so-called Mäntsäla 
Uprising in 1932 (when demands were put forward to also prohibit the Social-Democratic 
Party) the government declared the movement illegal and it subsequently transformed 
into Isänmaallinen kansanliike [The Fartherland Party]; Ylva Stubbergaard, Stat, kris och 
demokrati: Lapporörelsens inflytande i Finland 1929–1932 (Lund: Arkiv, 1996), 189–195.
9 In his seminal study on fascism, Uglevik Larsen also points out that it is problematic to use 
the term ‘fascist’ for Nasjonal Samling and many of its members, although ‘it was similar to 
such parties on some crucial points of comparison, having e.g. adopted some of its party 
program and organisational structure from the nsdap’; Stein Ugelvik Larsen, Bernt Hagtvet, 
and Jan Petter Myklebust, Who Were the Fascists: Social Roots of European Fascism (Bergen: 
Universitetsforlaget, 1980), 595.
10 Philip Morgan, Italian Fascism, 1915–1945, 2nd ed. (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2003), 45.
11 The inconsistency can be illustrated through The Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of Social 
and Political Movements. In Reichardt’s entry on ‘fascist movements’ we are told that they 
are characterised by ‘[t]he absence of stable organs of decision-making or a bureaucratic 
movement structure’ , while in Brustein’s entry on the ‘Nazi movement’ we read that Hitler 
within a very short time after taking over he succeeded in establish ‘complete authority’ 
while also issuing a 25-point party programme; David A. Snow et al., The Wiley-Blackwell 
Encyclopedia of Social and Political Movements, Vol. I (Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell, 2013), 
456, 824–826.
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 5 ---
206
Ruiz de Alda and José Antonio Primo de Rivera. Once the Falangists reorganised 
through a merger with Carlism under the direction of Francisco Franco, they 
transformed into a party and monopolised political power in the government.12 
Scholars have referred to all of these entities as ‘movements’ , sometimes by 
lumping them together under ‘fascist organisations and movements’.13
The ‘transnational turn’ in fascist studies has moreover led to a gradual 
expansion of the attention to ‘European’ or even ‘global’ fascism,14 with refer -
ences being made to ‘transnational fascism’ ,15 or ‘transnational fascist move -
ments’.16 The trend raises a new set of questions, which concern the very 
concept of transnationalism and its relation to movements. Theorists agree 
that transnational social movements ( tsm) are spreading and gaining in 
importance, with some arguing one should not only consider them a result of 
recent globalisation trends but that some have existed for considerable time. 
However, one also runs into a host of problems concerning the character of 
tsm, their relationship to national movements, state authorities and interna-
tional organisations. What is at stake is to understand if transnational move -
ments act outside the framework of national movements that have access to 
governments and polities; if their focus is on interaction with international 
organisations; or if they coordinate and provide legitimacy for national move -
ments and organisations.17 While the number of publications dealing with 
12 Stanley G. Payne, The Franco Regime, 1936–1975  (Madison, Wis: University of Wisconsin 
Press, 1987), 52–59.
13 Bauerkämper and Rossoliński-Liebe’s otherwise important contribution is a case in 
point. While referring to ‘cooperation between movements and regimes’ in the title, the 
introduction only contains a discussion about ‘transnational fascism’ and no effort to 
discuss how ideology and political praxis might be affected by the character of the entity, or 
whether one can actually speak about transnational movements in the 1930s; Bauerkämper 
and Rossoliński, Fascism Without Borders, 1–18.
14 See Stefan Berger and Holger Nehring, The History of Social Movements in Global 
Perspective: A Survey (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2017); Raimo Vayrynen, ‘Sovereignty, 
Globalization and Transnational Social Movements,’ International Relations of the Asia-
Pacific 1, no. 2 (2001): 227–246; Dawn Wiest and Jackie Smith, ‘Explaining Participation 
in Regional Transnational Social Movement Organizations,’ International Journal of 
Comparative Sociology 48, no. 2–3 (2007): 137–166.
15 Ángel Alcalde, ‘Towards Transnational Fascism: German Perceptions of Mussolini’s Fascists 
and the Early nsdap ,’ Politics, Religion & Ideology 19, no. 2 (2018): 176–195.
16 Samuel Huston Goodfellow, ‘Fascism as a Transnational Movement: The Case of Inter-War 
Alsace,’ Contemporary European History 22, no. 1 (2013): 87–106.
17 John A. Guidry, Michael D. Kennedy, and Mayer N. Zald, Globalizations and Social 
Movements: Culture, Power, and the Transnational Public Sphere (Ann Arbor: University of 
Michigan Press, 2000), 7–8.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 6 ---
207
transnational fascism has increased dramatically over recent years, few except 
Passmore have even addressed these issues conceptually.
Theorising Social Movements
It is easy to understand why someone would refrain from venturing into the 
cumbersome task of defining social movements, considering the plethora 
of sometimes contradictory definitions. To begin with popularised percep -
tions of the concept, Wikipedia relies on Shannon Deric’s definition of social 
movements ‘as organisational structures and strategies that may empower 
oppressed populations to mount effective challenges and resist the more pow -
erful and advantaged elites’.18 Encyclopaedia Britannica, by contrast, defines 
social movements as a ‘loosely organised but sustained campaign in support of 
a social goal, typically either the implementation or the prevention of a change 
in society’s structure or values’.19 Even though similarities exist between the 
definitions, the latter do not necessarily view movements as a reaction of the 
oppressed, while also allowing the inclusion of conservative movements that 
strive for the prevention of change. The definitions also diverge regarding the 
organisational form that characterises movements. While the former refers to 
‘organisational structures’ , the latter focuses on the movement as action rather 
than entity by putting the focus on the campaign rather than on the agent. We 
find similar distinctions in Tilly’s definition of the social movement as ‘a sus -
tained series of interaction between power-holders and persons successfully 
claiming to speak on behalf of a constituency lacking formal representation, in 
the course of which these persons make publicly visible claims for changes in 
the distribution of the exercise of power, and back those demands with public 
demonstrations of support’.20
John McCarthy and Meyer N. Zald take the discussion in a slightly different 
direction by defining movements as ‘a set of opinions and beliefs in a popula-
tion, which represents preferences for changing some elements of the social 
structure and/or reward distribution of a society’.21 Rucht has criticised both, 
18 ‘Social Movement,’ Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_movement#cite_note-
:0–4, accessed February 15, 2021. See also Davita Silfen Glasberg and Deric Shannon, Political 
Sociology: Oppression, Resistance, and the State  (Thousand Oaks, Calif. and London: Pine 
Forge Press/Sage Publications, 2011), 150.
19 ‘Social movement,’ Britannica.com, accessed February 15, 2021, https://www.britannica.com/
topic/social-movement.
20 Charles Tilly, From Mobilization to Revolution (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1978), 304.
21 J. Craig Jenkins, ‘Resource Mobilization Theory and the Study of Social Movements,’ Annual 
Review of Sociology 9, no. 1 (1983): 1217–1218.
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 7 ---
208
positing that if defined as a series of interactions then the social movement 
would confound those seeking change with the government they conflict with. 
Meyer and Zald instead risk including those who may sympathise with a move -
ment while doing nothing to support its activities. Rucht emphasises action to 
a higher degree, describing the social movement as ‘[a] network of individuals, 
groups and organisations that, based on a sense of collective identity, seek to 
bring about social change (or resist social change) primarily by way of collec-
tive public protest’.22
Rucht’s definition provides a useful starting point for an analysis of fascist 
movements. While presupposing the existence of some form of structure, 
the definition does not restrict itself to movements driven by a reaction of 
the oppressed and those seeking change. He also points out that while not 
being an organisation, a movement can within its network include organisa-
tions, ‘even those with a highly formalized character such as a political party’.23 
Interestingly, here one finds a contradiction between Passmore’s reference to 
Rucht and the claim that ‘one cannot solve the problem by dividing fascist 
organizations into social and political components either, or indeed by dis -
tinguishing between fascism-movement and fascism-regime’.24 As it turns out, 
Rucht bases such distinctions on power relations: ‘Given this heterogeneity of 
movement structures, it is no wonder that we may find within movements also 
those organizational forms which we have analytically separated from move -
ments, that is, interest groups and political parties. Only when one of these 
organizations succeeds in reaching a hegemonic position—controlling virtu-
ally all collective resources—would I no longer consider it a movement.’25
Rucht’s observation brings us to a conclusion of key importance. From the 
fact that fascist organisations and regimes like those in Italy or Hungary con-
trolled ‘all collective resources’ in their respective countries, it follows that fas -
cist networks would cease to make up movements after monopolising power, 
and certainly after becoming the regime of a state. What is at stake, therefore, 
22 Dieter Rucht, ‘Studying Social Movements: Some Conceptual Challenges,’ in The History 
of Social Movements in Global Perspective: A Survey, ed. Stefan Berger and Holger Nehring 
(London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, 2017).
23 Ibid., 44.
24 Passmore, ‘Fascism as Social Movement,’ 582.
25 Dieter Rucht, ‘National Context and Movement Structures,’ in Comparative Perspectives on 
Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural Framings, ed. 
Doug MacAdam, John D. McCarthy and Mayer N. Zald (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1996), 188. Diani concurs, positing that in ‘[w]hen this happens, as in the instances of 
the Bolshevik Party in Russia or the National Socialist Party in Germany, it is more important 
to drop the term “movement” altogether and concentrate instead on the concept of political 
organization’; Mario Diani and Doug McAdam, Social Movements and Networks: Relational 
Approaches to Collective Action (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), 9–10.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 8 ---
209
is to understand the differences between movements and organisations and 
the effects these might have on the strategies that will be applied depending 
on structure. As will be shown below, it would also seem that fascists, while 
using the term ‘movement’ as a way of rhetorically implying a popular support 
that transcends class and other socio-economic delineations within a national 
community, were fundamentally opposed to the very principles that provide 
the basis for how social movements are organised.
Distinguishing Between Organisations and Movements
If movements ‘have no top and clear center’ while being something else than 
organisations,26 what then distinguishes one from the other? Four of the key 
features characterising organisations are that they a) do not seek to achieve 
revolutionary societal change, b) try to maintain long-term stability by c) sys -
tematising the work process and d) formalising decision-making procedures.27 
Therefore, while movements have no formalised decision-making procedures 
and usually dissolve or transform once they achieve their goals (they are 
‘goal-oriented’), organisations such as parties and interest groups focus on ser -
vicing a constituency or clients by performing activities in demand (they are 
‘activity-oriented’). Another aspect is that movements orient their activities 
towards entire social groups or classes, including those that take no active part 
in the movement (e.g. working-class movement). Organisations are instead 
client or member-oriented (e.g. Alcoholics Anonymous), although they may 
also have a wider societal impact (for instance through the work of political 
parties).
Specialists have also identified a category of entities that bridge the dichot -
omy between movement and political organisations, referred to in the litera-
ture somewhat ambiguously as ‘party movements’ (or ‘movement parties’).28 
These entities are often defined as ‘organizations [my emphasis] that have 
attributes of both political parties and social movements’.29 Specifically, they 
seek to overcome the shortcomings movements often grapple with in terms 
of maintaining organisational stability and having access to legislative bodies. 
26 Rucht, ‘Studying Social Movements,’ 44.
27 ‘Formal organization,’ Encyclopaedia Britannica Academic, accessd June 23, 2019,  https://
www.britannica.com/topic/formal-organization.
28 See Marina Prentoulis and Lasse Thomassen, Movement Parties (Abingdon, Oxon; New York, 
NY: Routledge, 2020).
29 Mildred A. Schwartz, ‘Party Movements,’ in Oxford Research Encyclopedias, Politics (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2020).
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 9 ---
210
At the same time, they make use of movement strategies for the purpose of 
a mobilisation that provides grassroots-level legitimacy.30 As pointed out by 
Minkenberg, it should therefore come as no surprise that movement parties 
have become a hallmark of the populist Right:
Unlike other movement parties (such as the Greens in their early stag -
es), radical right parties usually do not emanate from social move -
ments, yet ‘apply the organizational and strategic practices of social 
movements in the arena of party competition’. Moreover, based on 
their activists’ and supporters’ basic value orientations and the radical 
right’s particular (anti-egalitarian, top-down) approach to politics, rad-
ical right parties typically exhibit the characteristics of a charismatic 
leadership which runs the party in an authoritarian fashion and lends 
the party organizational stability.31
The observation alludes to the fact that organisation charts, formalised 
decision-making bodies and procedures are distinguishing features of for -
mal organisations, which exist in parallel with informal organisations. This 
does not mean the latter lack hierarchies; these exist with the difference 
that decision-making takes place through informal channels, with leaders 
gaining legitimacy through interpersonal relationships, loyalties and per -
sonal charisma. The distinction draws on Max Weber’s division of the three 
different grounds for legitimising the right to authority:
Rational grounds—resting on a belief in the ‘legality’ of patterns of nor -
mative rules and the right of those elevated to authority under such rules 
to issue commands (legal authority). Traditional grounds—resting on an 
established belief in the sanctity of immemorial traditions and the legit -
imacy of the status of those exercising authority under them (traditional 
authority); or finally, charismatic grounds—resting on the devotion to 
the specific and exceptional sanctity, heroism or exemplary character of 
a person, and of the normative patterns or order revealed or ordained by 
him (charismatic authority).32
30 Ibid.
31 Michael Minkenberg, ‘Between Party and Movement: Conceptual and Empirical 
Considerations of the Radical Right’s Organizational Boundaries and Mobilization 
Processes,’ European Societies 21, no. 4 (2019): 466. The author used the Austrian Freedom 
Party, Lega Nord and the Swiss People’s Party as examples of party movements; Ibid. 467.
32 Max Weber, A. M. Henderson and Talcott Parsons, The Theory of Social and Economic 
Organization (New York: Oxford University Press, 2012), 328; see also Kieran Allen, Max 
Weber: A Critical Introduction (London: Pluto Press, 2004), 100.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 10 ---
211
Weber’s classification provides a means by which to separate different deci-
sion-making bodies and processes, with movements having certain similar -
ities with informal organisations. Specifically, leaders of social movements 
cannot claim legal authority and instead rely on a charismatic leadership that 
provides popular legitimacy and strengthens their influence in contact with 
other actors within and outside the governmental structures.33 Parties, on 
the other hand, are usually governed by legal-rational decision-making pro -
cedures and seek direct access to legislative bodies. Although being organ-
isations—and often highly centralised, top-down ones at that—movement 
parties instead apply movement strategies to overcome limitations insofar 
as representation is concerned, while sometimes being part of movements.
To summarise, social movements differ from organisations but may include 
what is often referred to as social movement organisations (smo s) within the 
network of entities that make up the movement.34 The smo s help articulate 
policies, influence policy-makers and guide movement activities towards the 
achievement of goals common to the movement. Such processes do not hap -
pen in a vacuum and the interaction between smo s and authorities sometimes 
also leads to the transformation of the former along what Kriesi has identified 
as four basic ‘trajectories’.35 One development is to move toward institutional-
isation. This means the organisation keeps its orientation towards influencing 
authorities, but relinquishes direct participation as a critical feature for the 
benefit of a formalisation of the decision-making process (the typical example 
is when a smo turns into a political party). The second trajectory leads towards 
commercialisation, transforming the smo into a service-provider to external 
‘clients’ , which also entails a drastic reduction of direct participation in activi-
ties. The third trajectory results in an involution whereby the smo transforms 
into a service-provider that allows direct participation in activities, although 
moving from being oriented towards authorities to focus on the smo constit -
uency. This typically happens when the smo abandons the desire to achieve 
social or political change and retreats into becoming an advocacy group repre -
senting particular socio-economic or cultural substrata in society. One aspect 
Kriesi did not develop that much concerns the radicalisation of the smo . Here, 
he builds on Zald and Ash, who attribute radicalisation to a combination of a 
charismatic leader and the emergence of an oligarchy that is more radical than 
33 Snow et al., The Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of Social and Political Movements, I, 176.
34 Ibid., 1196.
35 Hanspeter Kriesi, ‘New Social Movements in a Political Context,’ in Comparative Perspectives 
on Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural Framings, 
ed. Doug MacAdam, John D. McCarthy and N. Zald Mayer (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1996).
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 11 ---
212
an increasingly apathetic core constituency. Leadership thus becomes critical, 
as it is the role of the charismatic leader to mobilise the constituencies for 
action.36
Contentious Politics
While some of the early thinkers believed the social movement emerged 
due to the type of ‘crowd psychology’ Passmore argues has influenced fascist 
figure 1 Kriesi’s Trajectory of Social Movement Organisations. Source: Kriesi, Hanspeter, 
‘New Social Movements in a Political Context,’ in Comparative Perspectives on 
Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and Cultural 
Framings, ed. Doug MacAdam, John D. McCarthy and Mayer N. Zald (New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996), 157. Reproduced with permission.
36 Mayer N. Zald and Roberta Ash, ‘Social Movement Organizations: Growth, Decay and 
Change,’ Social Forces 44, no. 3 (1966): 338–339. More recent research has rediscovered 
Mathiesen’s concept of ‘the unfinished’ to explain how ‘abolitionist’ movements radicalise 
to achieve sweeping political and social change; Andreas Armborst, ‘Radicalisation and 
De-radicalisation of Social Movements: The Comeback of Political Islam?’ Crime, Law 
and Social Change 62, no. 3 (2014). For an implementation of the model on the uhro , see 
Tomislav Dulić and Goran Miljan, ‘The Ustašas and Fascism: “Abolitionism” , Revolution, and 
Ideology (1929–1942),’ Journal of Soviet and Post-Soviet Politics and Society 6, no. 1 (2020): 
281–309.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 12 ---
213
studies,37 adherents of Mass Society Theory instead focused on how individu-
als joined extreme movements because of a sense of isolation brought about 
by the increasing individualism of modern society.38 As argued by Tarrow, 
however, Marxism probably provided the most persuasive framework through 
its emphasis on ‘relative deprivation’ , although constantly grappling with the 
issue of mass mobilisation. Departing from a structuralist approach, Marx 
did not bother too much about exploring how the mobilisation would hap -
pen. Rather, he viewed the emergence and growth of social movements as a 
natural consequence of the inherent contradictions in the capitalist mode of 
production, which resulted in an alienation and grievances that would enable 
mobilisation. Disenchanted with the passivity of the working class, however, 
Lenin looked for the answer in a ‘top-down’ approach that resulted in his idea 
about a vanguard spearheading collective action. Gramsci, finally, believed the 
answer to the limited capability of the working class to mobilise ‘from below’ 
was a matter of a class-consciousness that he believed could be developed by 
the help of ‘cultural hegemony’.39
The post-Second World War period saw the development of several theo -
retical approaches, most of which were essentially critical of the ‘relative dep -
rivation model’ that had dominated the previous period. McCarthy, Zald and 
other adherents of the ‘resource mobilisation theory’ came to exert a profound 
influence on the field with a rational-choice inspired focus on how movements 
identify goals, formulate strategies and mobilise human, infrastructural, finan-
cial, ideational and other resources in pursuit of movement goals.40 Another 
strand of thought had its roots in the Gramscian perspective and focused on 
so-called framing processes, in other words how the movement would appeal 
to the general public and thus achieve mobilisation through the proliferation 
of ‘collective action frames’.41 Being an adherent of what later became known 
as political opportunity theory, Tilly sought to understand why certain move -
ments succeed while others did not by shifting focus to the public space in 
which movements engage with policy-makers and other individual and collec-
tive actors. He divided the space into a relatively secluded ‘polity’ , in which par -
ties and other influential actors have direct access to political decision-making 
37 Gustave Le Bon, The Crowd: A Study of the Popular Mind (London: T. Fisher Unwin, 1897).
38 See William Kornhauser, The Politics of Mass Society (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
1960).
39 Sidney G. Tarrow, Power in Movement: Social Movements and Contentious Politics, 3rd rev. and 
updat. ed. (Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2011), 17–20.
40 Jenkins, ‘Resource Mobilization Theory and the Study of Social Movements,’ 532–533.
41 Robert D. Benford and David A. Snow, ‘Framing Processes and Social Movements: An 
Overview and Assessment,’ Annual review of sociology 26, no. 1 (2000): 611–639.
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 13 ---
214
bodies, and an area outside the polity where there is no such direct access. 
Being deprived of such access, challengers engage in coalition-building with 
members of the polity or other ‘outsiders’ who have access to such actors, 
while balancing between opportunities and threats. The authorities, for their 
part, either facilitate movement activity by lowering the cost for mobilisation, 
or resort to repression.42
The character of the movement, its aims and the political context in which 
it engages with the authority will furthermore affect the strategies it uses to 
achieve its aims and goals, as well as the reactions of the authority. While some 
movements will focus on the mobilisation of human, material and cultural 
resources to influence the polity, others will turn to ‘agenda-setting’ via media 
to create awareness-making, maintain in-group cohesion and attract follow -
ers. Tilly’s approach involves what Tarrow termed ‘contentious politics’ , which 
includes various forms of disruption such as sit-ins, public disturbances, riot -
ing and intimidation, which are applied to increase pressure on the author -
ities. Following Minkenberg, it seems this strategy is the most interesting to 
apply when analysing right-wing “movement parties”:
figure 2 Tilly’s Polity Model. Source: Sidney G. Tarrow, Power in Movement: Social Movements 
and Contentious Politics (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2011), 21. Reproduced with permission.
42 Tilly, From Mobilization to Revolution, 100, 33.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 14 ---
215
This organizational stability of successful radical right parties notwith-
standing, they clearly qualify as movement parties in that they are con-
tinuously engaged in ‘contentious politics’ as defined by Tilly and Tarrow, 
that is, a process of collective claims making at the interplay of conten-
tion, collective action and politics. They do not only challenge govern-
ments as ‘targets, initiators of claims, or third parties’. They challenge all 
other parties or even the political order in a populist style, rather than 
merely seeking office or a change in policy.43
Even though Tilly provides a useful framework for the analysis of processes of 
contention and the situations in which movements emerge, he also confined 
it to the interplay between national governments and movements seeking to 
influence or even overthrow them. While allowing for the existence of ‘outside 
actors’ , the model does not elaborate much on their interaction with external 
state-based polities. This means Tilly’s model is restricted to a national perspec-
tive that does not account for the activities of transnational social movements.
Movement Activities in a ‘Transnational Space’
Turning to transnationalism as a phenomenon, it appears that fascist entities 
by and large restricted activities across national borders to various forms of 
knowledge-transfer, rather than to coordinate contentious action directed 
against international bodies or national governments. To define such forms 
of cross-border interaction as transnationalism represents a departure from 
what social scientists understand as transnationalism or transnational social 
movements. Khagram et al., for instance, refer to three forms of transnational 
activities, including transnational advocacy networks (focusing on informa-
tion-exchange between non-governmental bodies in at least three countries), 
transnational coalitions (coordinating shared strategies to bring about social 
change) and transnational social movements (who mobilise sustained activ -
ities in more than one country for the purpose of achieving social change).44 
According to the authors, these ‘share some collective beliefs or collective action 
frames’ and seek to influence norms in an ‘international arena’.45 Drawing on 
43 Minkenberg, ‘Between Party and Movement,’ 467.
44 Sanjeev Khagram, James V. Riker and Kathryn Sikkink, ‘From Santiago to Seattle: 
Transnational Advocacy Groups Restructuring World Politics,’ in Restructuring World Politics: 
Transnational Social Movements, Networks, and Norms, ed. Sanjeev Khagram, James V. Riker 
and Kathryn Sikkink (University of Minnesota Press, 2002).
45 Ibid., 15.
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 15 ---
216
Habermas, Guidry et al. define the arena as a space beyond national bounda-
ries that movements and organisations enter in pursuit of goals that cannot be 
adequately addressed on a national level:
Globalisation has in fact brought social movements together across bor -
ders in a ‘transnational public sphere’ , a real as well as conceptual space 
in which movement organizations interact, contest each other and their 
objects, and learn from each other. ‘Action at a distance’ does not real-
ly occur from a distance. This action originates somewhere, proceeds 
through specific channels, does something, and has concrete effects in 
particular places. That action is, however, mediated by discursive rela-
tionships that are forged in a transnational public sphere.46
One way of explaining the difference between transnationalism and interna-
tional cooperation, in other words, is to depart from the Latin etymology and 
view trans-nationalism as political activism ‘above’ or ‘beyond’ the national 
level. Inter-national cooperation, by contrast, happens ‘between’ or ‘among’ 
state-based entities that may engage in information exchange but do not 
act in a transnational public space. However, the advancements have also 
unearthed many controversies concerning political opportunity and mobili-
sation structures and their relationship to the transnational space. As pointed 
out by Hanna, tsm s often struggle when seeking to achieve a common ‘global 
good’ due to the fact that international bodies lack the coercive means that 
remain tightly associated with state sovereignty: ‘Despite globalization, there 
is nothing to suggest state sovereignty is losing much of its operational value in 
legal and political decision making, and thus one can hardly expect program-
matic and sustained attempts to address climate change or nuclear weapons, 
for example, without some kind of engagement with international institutions 
and, at least, the prospect of inducing the action of nation-states.’47
What relevance does this have for studies of ‘transnational fascism’ and how 
are we to understand cross-border cooperation during the interwar period? If 
considering that transnationalism plays out in a ‘transnational public space’ 
above and beyond the nation-state, one immediately runs into two problems 
of relevance. Firstly, one needs to identify a transnational public space that 
46 John Guidry, Michael D. Kennedy, and Mayer Zald, ‘Globalizations and Social Movements,’ 
in Globalizations and Social Movements: Culture, Power, and the Transnational Public Sphere  
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 2000), 3.
47 Mark Hanna, ‘Between Law and Transnational Social Movement Organizations: Stabilizing 
Expectations of Global Public Goods,’ Journal of Law and Society 44, no. 3 (2017): 347.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 16 ---
217
provides fascist entities—whether movements or smo s—with an arena in 
which to act. This appears to be a challenge at a time when the development of 
an international political arena with inter-governmental bodies hardly existed 
with the exception of a few such as the League of Nations. Secondly, fascist 
political actors were by and large ardent opponents to ‘internationalism’ and 
any infringements on state sovereignty. Departing from how transnationalism 
has been understood in the theoretical fields from which the concept emerged, 
it therefore remains to be seen whether a transnational fascist movement that 
worked for a fascist ‘global common good’ by acting in a transnational public 
space ever existed.
To summarise, there is a need for the field of fascist studies to engage in a 
discussion with the concept of transnationalism in a logically coherent way that 
makes it possible to distinguish what is commonly understood as transnation-
alism from the type of exchange of goods, services and ideas that traditionally 
characterised international cooperation and which by and large happened on 
a bilateral level. To do so, I develop Tilly’s model by proposing a matrix that 
provides an overview of how networks of international movements transcend 
jurisdictions and may influence governments in several countries by acting 
on a vertical ‘transnational public space’ identified by Guidry et al. to pursue 
a ‘common good’. This allows accounting for the fact that when an actor finds 
itself outside the jurisdiction of one state it is almost always within the juris -
diction of another. I therefore divide the model into a grey box representing a 
government, a box with a dotted line representing the limit of a polity within 
each state and a full line representing the limits of state jurisdiction. Inside the 
jurisdiction, we have smo s, which form coalitions (full arrow line) and seek to 
figure 3 Matrix of Transnational Social Movement Activity.
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 17 ---
218
exert influence (dotted arrow line) on political parties or individuals (‘P’) and 
other organisations to influence the government and its policies. Adding to this 
is a vertical space containing a transnational social movement ( tsm), which 
the state-based smo s form part of. The model illustrates that tsm s differ from 
traditional state-based movements by not having a direct legal or other influ-
ence on polities. They can influence a variety of international bodies, even to 
the point of enacting laws and regulations on the international level, but since 
executive powers rest with sovereignty, the tsm will always be at a disadvantage 
if states refuse to pass regulations. The tsm is instead a network of state-based 
smo s, through which it might affect national polities, although it may also influ-
ence governments through international organisations (io) such as the UN. As 
a result, they instead seek to influence the nation-based smo s, which for their 
part use references to international or transnational movements for the pur -
pose of legitimizing their demands on authorities. Whether the organisations 
are part of transnational movements will furthermore affect political opportu-
nity structures (the adoption of international treaties or laws might provide a 
window of opportunity for action), mobilisation structures (through the inter -
nationalisation of the recruitment base to include non-national members in 
national smo s) and framing processes (by providing an argument for referring 
to international norms or threats as a means by which to mobilise constitu-
encies). This also means smo A in country X that is in no direct coalition with 
smo B in country Y can still exert an influence on the smo through either smo  
C in country Z or through the tsm X 2. I furthermore assume the interactions 
between smo s and tsm s will affect the ideational and structural evolution of 
the smo , not least in terms of ideology, activism and framing.
Empirical Analysis
While there is debate regarding the exact date for the establishment of uhro , 
scholars trace its origins to the interwar Hrvatska Stranka Prava [hsp; Croatian 
Party of Rights]. Ante Pavelić became the party secretary of hsp in 1927 when 
following a trip to Paris he travelled to Rome to hand over a memorandum 
regarding collaboration with the Italian regime to establish an independent 
Croatia under Italian tutelage.48 The next stage in his development came 
48 I documenti diplomatici italiani, vol. V, Settima serie (Roma: Commissione per la 
pubblicazione dei documenti diplomatici, 1967), 303–305; see also Jozo Tomasevich, War 
and Revolution in Yugoslavia 1941–1945: Occupation and Collaboration (Stanford: Stanford 
University Press, 2001), 30.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 18 ---
219
following the mortal wounding of Stjepan Radić, the leader of the Hrvatska 
seljačka stranka [hss; Croatian Peasant’s Party] in the Yugoslav parliament 
on 28 June 1928.49 Fearing a dissolution of the state, King Alexander abol-
ished the constitution on 6 January 1941, which prompted Pavelić to leave for 
Bulgaria later the same month. In Sofia, he met Gustav Perčec and issued the 
‘Sofia Declaration’ , which stipulated cooperation with the Vnatrešna makedon-
ska revolucionerna organisacija [ vmro; Internal Macedonian Revolutionary 
Organisation] for the dissolution of Yugoslavia.50 This stage in the evolution of 
uhro is of theoretical importance, as it means that even before the existence 
of an Ustaša ‘fascist movement’ on Yugoslav soil, its leaders left the country 
altogether to seek support abroad. In Bulgaria, Pavelić met with members of a 
radical organisation with ties to members of the Bulgarian polity (albeit indi-
rectly with the government), which were no more fascist at the time than the 
uhro . In the early 1930s, these organisations can best be described as right-
wing terrorist organisations working for national independence through polit -
ical violence.
Pavelić’s stay in Bulgaria had a profound effect on his further development 
as a politician and on the articulation of a radical agenda of the uhro . First, 
by establishing contacts with vmro , he embarked on a strategy character -
ised by terrorist violence, resulting in the assassination of King Alexander ii  
and French Foreign Minister Louis Barthou in Marseille in 1934. Second, his 
contacts with vmro and the inflammatory speeches he gave provoked the 
Yugoslav government to sentence Pavelić to death in absentia on 17 July 1930. 51 
Third, it meant Pavelić became a pariah with no way back into the polity of 
Yugoslavia. He settled in Italy until 1931, where he found himself under intern-
ment because of the regicide in 1934. It was during this period that his political 
ideology underwent a further radicalisation.
Establishment of uhro
The gradual process of fascistisation began after the formulation of the 
Constitution of the Ustaša Organisation in 1932, which also can be seen as the 
final stage in the establishment of a terrorist organisation. The Constitution 
defined uhro as ‘a revolutionary organisation’ , with the goal to establish an 
49 Ibid., 25.
50 Jelić-Butić, Ustaše i ndh, 20.
51 Mario Jareb, Ustaško-domobranski pokret: od nastanka do travnja 1941. godine (Zagreb: 
Školska knj., 2006), 83.
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 19 ---
220
independent state ‘throughout the entire national and historical territory’ 
where Croats lived.52 It also stipulated that Croats would be the owners of all 
the ‘real and spiritual assets’ of the state after its creation. The Constitution 
then moves to a discussion of the organisational structure of uhro , which 
the Ustaša based on a combination of Weber’s legal-rational and charismatic 
principles of authority. First (points 3–6), the principles described the organi-
sational structure of the uhro , subdivided into tabor, logor, stožer and Glavni 
Ustaški Stan [gus; Ustaša Headquarters], which elected the Poglavnik, sub -
ordinated leaders (stožernik, logornik, tabornik) and various officials and spe -
cialists. The Constitution stipulated that ‘any Croat’ capable of carrying out 
the struggle and showing absolute loyalty could join the organisation, while 
only the Poglavnik had the right to relieve a member of his or her duties. It 
moreover contained the text of an oath of allegiance each new member had 
to swear and which envisaged complete obedience to the Poglavnik personally 
and other superiors under penalty of death. Two points (12–13) regulated the 
work of the Ustaša Court and clarified that the Ustaša Headquarters would 
decide on some other matters relating to the organisational work.
Adding to the Constitution were fifteen (later expanded to seventeen) 
Ustaša Principles from June 1933, which had the aim of a) defining the Croatian 
nation as distinct from the ‘eastern’ Serbs and b) to give a historical motive for 
the establishment of an independent state. Points 1–5 dealt with the ancient 
and medieval history of the Croats, describing them as a formed and organised 
nation at the time of arrival in their own Croatian state’ , the right to which 
it retained until the First World War. Points 8–12 dealt with the regenerative 
element of the Croatian nation and its right to rule, where one reiterated the 
historical right of Croats to recreate their own state throughout the historical 
and national territory. The Principles further stipulated that Croats ‘belong to 
the western culture and civilisation’; that the peasantry formed the basis of 
the Croatian nation; and that only Croats ‘by blood’ had a place in the national 
community.53
Insofar as the organisational structure is concerned, it basically followed the 
leader principle to the letter, which is evident not least from the establishment 
of the gus in 1932. The body represented a form of ‘government-in-exile’ that 
consisted of two parts: the Poglavnik’s Adjutant Assembly (Poglavnički zbor) 
with seven members and a Council (Doglavničko vijeće) consisting of twelve 
52 The ideological basis for these claims derived from ‘pravaštvo’ (from ‘rights’ in the legal 
sense), the idea that Croatia should be established on the entire territory of the state that 
joined in a personal union with the Hungarian King Coloman I in 1102.
53 The text of the Principles is reproduced in Jareb, Ustaško-domobranski pokret, 124–128.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 20 ---
221
officials. As Jelić-Butić points out, the gus was never formally convened and 
it is unclear who its members—which were formally appointed by Pavelić—
actually were. Accordingly, ‘authority over the organisation was in the hands 
of the Ustasha leader, on whose will depended the position of each individual 
member, including the most prominent one’ , which lead her to conclude:
As the ideological and organisational founder of Ustashism, Pavelić tried 
his best to be the only inspirer in attracting and gathering members of 
the Ustasha organisation. In any case, this also influenced the formula-
tion of the mentioned hierarchical status of the Ustasha organisation. 
Pavelić paid full attention to the creation of the Ustasha organisation not 
only in Italy, where he participated most directly, but in all other regions 
as well, where his most loyal associates created the Ustasha organisation 
exclusively on his behalf. Undoubtedly, due to personal interests, there 
was rivalry in the ranks of the Ustasha emigration, in other words con-
flicts between individuals and affluent or less influential Ustasha offi-
cials. However, there was no serious opposition to Pavelic himself even 
among the more influential groups, which could jeopardise his position 
and weaken his authority.54
Jelić-Butić’s characterisation of the uhro illustrates that it was deeply 
engrained in the movement from the onset and allegiance to the Poglavnik 
was not merely a matter of paying lip service to the leader. Those who joined 
the uhro did so in full knowledge of the fact that transgressions would result 
in their death (which also happened on a few occasions). The top echelons 
of the UHRO refrained from challenging Pavelić, with the notable exception 
of what seems to have been a half-hearted effort by Branko Jelić in the spring 
of 1934 to gain influence and possibly challenge Pavelić himself. The episode 
was nipped in the bud and if anything strengthened Pavelić as the undisputed 
leader of the uhro for the duration of the interwar period.55 Looking back on 
the creation of the ndh state, Mile Budak (at the time Minister of Culture) 
argued in August 1941 that it ‘was the deed of the Poglavnik . . .  others have par -
ticipated as well, but without him – everything would . . . wait for its leader’.56 
54 Jelić-Butić, Ustaše i ndh.
55 Mile Budak, ‘Omladina je izvršila svoju dužnost,’ in Ustaška mladež – omladinski prilog 
Ustaše, 3 August 1941, no. 5, 3, quoted in Goran Miljan, Croatia and the Rise of Fascism: The 
Youth Movement and the Ustasha During WWII (London, New York: I.B. Tauris, 2018), 53.
56 Goran Miljan, Croatia and The Rise of Fascism: The youth Movement and the Ustasha During 
WWII (London: I.B. Tauris, 2018), 53.
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 21 ---
222
It is thus not only that there was no serious challenge to Pavelić; he became 
the centrepiece of a personal cult that turned him into the embodiment of the 
nation and the one individual without whom there would simply not be an 
independent Croatian state. This also meant the classic distinction between 
the legislative and executive branches of government did not exist in the ndh, 
‘because all state powers were transferred into the hands of the executive 
[branch] headed by the Poglavnik’.57
Transnational Activities
The extent to which the UHRO became fully ‘fascistised’ in the 1930s has been 
debated and is a topic that cannot be dealt with in detail here.58 Suffice it to say 
that while the Ustaša did not elaborate very much on fascist ideology and its 
relationship to the Croatian nation in the first half of the 1930s, Pavelić firmly 
positioned Ustaštvo in the camp of European fascism. This is clear in his book 
Strahote zabluda (published in Siena in 1938). The book represented a thor -
ough dismissal of communism as not only a political danger, but also as a dan-
ger to humanity, morality and the family:
Fascism emerged in the west on the ravages of democracy, which could 
not oppose Bolshevism when it wanted to invade from Russia to the west. 
Her system, her methods of work and the resources she could muster, 
could not measure and even less suppress and defy the ways of the work 
of Bolshevism and its means of struggle, just as a fishing boat cannot op -
pose a battleship. Something new, something stronger and more capable 
of fighting Bolshevism was needed, capable of defeating it. And this has 
been found in fascism. Of course, fascism first had to remove democracy, 
which proved to be inadequate and incompetent for that struggle.59
The period 1938–1940 is especially interesting also from a theoretical point 
of view because political developments opened for the uhro , while still 
being banned, to act inside Yugoslavia by proxy. Believing they could control 
the Ustašas, the Yugoslav government reached an agreement with Italy that 
57 Miloš Zdravković, ‘Ustavnopravni temelji Nezavisne Države Hrvatske,’ Anali pravnog 
fakulteta u Beogradu 67, no. 1 (2019): 127.
58 For more details on the fascitisation of the Ustaša organisation, see Dulić and Miljan, ‘The 
Ustašas and Fascism.’
59 Ante Pavelić, Strahote zabluda: komunizam i boljševizam u Rusiji i u svijetu (Zagreb: 
Croatiaprojekt, 2000), 49.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 22 ---
223
allowed for the return of exiled Ustašas including Mile Budak to the country. 
The sworn-in Ustaša members immediately embarked on a propaganda and 
networking campaign that involved the creation of journals such as Hrvatski 
Narod, Hrvatska Smotra and Hrvatska Revija, all of which published articles 
questioning the Versailles Agreement and engaged with other contentious 
issues. During this period, the organisation also developed ‘transnational’ 
cooperation with several other fascist and right-wing organisations. Contacts 
were of course established with the Italian fascists early on, as well as with 
the nsdap . Apart from that, however, the Ustašas also cooperated with some 
influential revolutionary nationalist organisations, such as the Organisation 
of Ukrainian Nationalists (oun), while trying albeit being less successful in 
attracting support from various Croatian emigrant organisations in coun-
tries such as Belgium, the United States and Argentina.60 While remaining in 
Italy, Pavelić and the Ustaša leadership worked with its representatives inside 
Yugoslavia to establish alliances with nationalist individuals and organisations 
such as the cooperative Uzdanica and the academic society August Šenoa.61 
The network is reminiscent of a movement with its organisations and net -
works that crossed national borders. However, it is questionable whether these 
entities were part of a movement that can be termed fascist in any meaningful 
way, or if we are dealing with a nationalist movement for Croatian independ-
ence led by a fascist organisation. Neither did the uhro work for a ‘common 
good’ with fascist or right-wing entities in other countries, but instead focused 
on national independence for Croatia.
Independent State of Croatia
By the time uhro had transformed into a fascist entity, political events once 
more played tricks with the prospect of Croatian statehood. After first becom-
ing disenchanted with the hss leadership under Vladimir Maček following 
the establishment of Banovina Hrvatska in 1939 and the latter’s entry into the 
Yugoslav government, the Ustaša once again found themselves sidestepped by 
political developments. Even though the outbreak of the Second World War 
at first suggested the destruction of Yugoslavia was a matter of time, Berlin 
disappointed by starting negotiations with Belgrade to have Yugoslavia join 
the Tripartite Pact. The talks intensified in the autumn of 1940 because of the 
Italian debacle during the Greek campaign and culminated with Yugoslavia’s 
60 Jelić-Butić, Ustaše i ndh, 27–29.
61 Ibid., 43, 50.
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 23 ---
224
signing of the pact on 25 March 1941.62 Ustaša propaganda during late 1940 
illustrates well the disappointment felt by the Ustaša elite. While having pre -
sented the ‘maximalist’ version of ‘Greater Croatia’ (including Montenegro, 
Sandžak and Bačka) as its goal through propaganda in the autumn of 1940,63 
Pavelić found himself sidestepped by the new turn of events. Evidently dis -
traught by the prospect of not being able to re-establish Croatia as an inde -
pendent state anytime soon—if at all—he issued a propaganda leaflet that 
shows the preparedness of uhro to compromise even on the key ‘thousand 
years dream’ of independence:
The time has come when we, the Croatian nationalists, have to speak open-
ly. For far too long, too many of us have been uttering the liberal-democrat -
ic phrases—‘liberation’ , ‘independence’ and ‘peace’ . . . . There will be no 
independence until we voluntarily adapt to the science of fascism and its 
leaders; there will be no peace for as long as our Italian brothers are pre -
occupied with such a bitter struggle . . . . What will happen after the war? I 
have received a holy vow by the Duce himself, that Croatia and her services 
will not remain unrewarded. She will have a perfect part to play in the ‘new 
order’ as a bridge between fascist Italy and national socialist Germany . . . . 
Although borders will divide us, we will be united in a spirit of devotion to 
the totalitarian ideals.64
Following a coup d’état in Belgrade on 27 March 1941, a major political change 
occurred that had a profound effect on various levels. Because of the invasion 
of Yugoslavia in April 1941, the organisation became a state-founding political 
party endowed with control over a military, a state apparatus, an education 
system and various media outlets. The speed with which the new state author -
ities reorganised the state apparatus to mimic the fascist system of joining the 
party structures with governmental authorities; implementation of a ‘charis -
matic’ leadership embodied in the Poglavnik; adoption of racial laws and a 
concentration camp system; and efforts to educate the youth into the ideals 
of the ‘new man’ show that the uhro had adopted fascism as a core ideol-
ogy. The revolution aimed to achieve the totalitarian remoulding of the society 
and population and introducing a totalitarian system described in a speech 
by Mirko Puk, the Minister of Justice and Religion, during the meeting of the 
Sabor in early 1942:
62 Tomasevich, War and Revolution in Yugoslavia 1941–1945, 46.
63 Croatian State Archives, Stampata ndh ( zb-xviii-L-29/1318).
64 Croatian State Archives, Stampata ndh ( zb-xviii-L-29/1340).
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 24 ---
225
The authoritarian state refutes the legal theories that have existed so far, 
according to which all people are equal and instead adopts another prin-
ciple of the selection of human beings. According to that and the spirit 
of the Ustaša Principles, the new legal system had to be organised ac-
cording to the principles of leadership, the so-called Führer-principle . . . 
The authoritarian state, the state of the new order, is not a despotism, a 
satrapy, but a state where the leader rules, as the best among the people, 
in cooperation with the other good and best members of a people, where 
in accordance with the legal form he decides after listening to them and 
makes his own decision.65
It should be clear from the aforementioned that there is in fact little in the 
Ustaša Constitution that suggests it resembled anything akin to a social or 
political movement, but in fact was an organisation with a clear and hierar -
chically organised and ‘top-down’ decision-making structure. The question, 
therefore, is whether one could view it as a part of a (nationalist) Croatian 
movement during the brief period it collaborated with Uzdanica and others 
in 1936–1940, or if it was an smo in the framework of a European-wide fascist 
movement. This, it seems at first glance, is more reasonable, because within 
a relatively short time after the adoption of the Principles, the uhro began a 
gradual process of fascistisation that was directly influenced by its relationship 
to Italy. In the case of Croatia, however, the uhro leadership soon monopo -
lised virtually all means of collective action in line with Rucht’s argument.
Conclusion
As shown in the empirical analysis, the uhro was established as a terrorist 
organisation in the early 1930s. The Ustašas coordinated their activities with 
the regimes in Hungary and Italy and through vmro in Bulgaria with its ties 
to parts of the Bulgarian polity. The uhro was hierarchically organised with 
a very strict top-down command structure that emphasised obedience until 
death, where the principle of charismatic authority was important. Although 
it initially focused on one question—the independence of Croatia—which 
is characteristic of social movements, the decision-making structure of 
uhro is hardly reminiscent of what scholars usually mean when referring to 
65 Brzopisni zapisci prvog zasjedanja Hrvatskog državnog sabora u Nezavisnoj Državi Hrvatskoj 
godine 1942. Od I. do XII. saborske sjednice od 23. veljače do 28. prosinca 1942 (Zagreb: Hrvatski 
Državni Sabor, 1942), 37–38.
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 25 ---
226
‘movements’. Neither was it a movement party, but a terrorist organisation that 
existed mainly outside of Yugoslavia and had no access to the state polity.
Concluding that the uhro was not a movement begs the question whether 
or not we can regard it as an smo within the framework of a transnational 
fascist movement. The uhro was definitively part of a web of fascist organisa-
tions that provided both ideological guidance and identified enemies against 
which it was fighting, including the pnf , vmro , oun and authorities in revan-
chist Hungary. This notwithstanding, one also needs to remember that some 
of the entities they interacted with can hardly be considered fascist. Even if 
removing the non-fascist entities from the would-be transnational fascist 
movement, one is left with the problem of identifying the counterpart with 
which the supposed movement is interacting in order to achieve what can be 
considered a reasonable ‘common good’ that united the different entities that 
made up the movement. Overall, fascist entities acted in a context dominated 
by the nation-state that had not yet begun to be challenged by the structural 
changes brought about by late twentieth-century globalisation processes. As a 
result, there was in fact not very much that networks of fascist entities could 
do to influence governments ‘from above’ and they by and large limited their 
activities to international exchange through state-based organisations such as 
Comitati d’Azione per l’Università di Roma (caur), Fasci Italiani all’Estero or the 
youth organisations Balilla and Gioventù italiana del Littorio all’estero.66
This serves to illustrate that efforts to study European fascism as a trans -
national movement runs into several theoretical problems that have hardly 
been addressed in comparative fascist studies. While today we speak of trans -
national movements that act on the ‘transnational space’ referred to by Guidry 
et al., such arenas hardly existed during the interwar period and even if they 
did, they would be difficult to reconcile with a fascist political ideology funda-
mentally opposed to ‘internationalism’ that would curtail sovereignty in any 
way. This is not to say that one cannot use the term ‘transnational’ in a different 
way to denote what essentially is international knowledge-transfer between 
state-based and even governmental entities. However, this type of expansion 
of transnationalism as a concept obscures the distinction that is often made 
between the type of activities ‘above’ or ‘beyond’ the state and international 
knowledge-transfer that had no wider goals.
66 Luca de Caprariis, “‘Fascism for Export’? The Rise and Eclipse of the Fasci Italiani all’Estero,’ 
Journal of Contemporary History 35, no. 2 (2000): 151–183; Katharina Schembs, ‘Fascist Youth 
Organizations and Propaganda in a Transnational Perspective: Balilla and Gioventù Italiana 
del Littorio All’estero in Argentina (1922–1955),’ Amnis no. 12 (2013), https://doi.org/10.4000/
amnis.2021.
dulić
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

File: --- Fascism and (Transnational) Social Movements.pdf --- Page 26 ---
227
While these aspects point to a need for more conceptual groundwork to 
be done before fascism can be studied as a movement (transnational or oth-
erwise), one also needs to keep in mind that this analysis dealt with one of 
many fascist entities. Social movement theory might therefore still provide a 
useful tool for the analysis of entities that might be more reasonably defined 
as movements than the uhro . However, there are some alternatives to social 
movement theory, which should be considered for those seeking to under -
stand the way in which fascist entities organise, mobilise and function from a 
theoretical point of view. As Diani and Bison point out, not all collective action 
is attributable to social movements. This is particularly true of the ‘conflictual 
organisational processes’ into which they put Nazi and Bolshevik revolution-
ary activities ‘where actors with legitimacy to mobilise will be those who do so 
through organisations, and there will be few opportunities for individuals to 
play any role unless their participation is mediated by specific organisations’.67 
In a recent effort to bridge the theoretical and conceptual gap between social 
movement and organisation theory, Clemens furthermore draws our attention 
to the fact that social movement theory deals with the relationships among 
smo s and individuals that make up movements.68 Organisation theory, by 
contrast, deals with relationships within organisations. Keeping this in mind, 
comparative analyses should pay more attention to organisation theory while 
also trying to better understand how at least some fascist entities that can 
be understood as social movements transform into political organisations 
(whether parties or movement parties), which will also deepen the analysis of 
transnational—or perhaps better international—fascism. A more precise and 
theoretically well-founded understanding and implementation of concepts 
and theory would probably also help explain the nature of fascist ideology and 
praxis and its transformation over time.
67 Mario Diani and Ivano Bison, ‘Organizations, Coalitions, and Movements,’ Theory and 
Society 33, no. 3/4 (2004): 286.
68 Elisabeth S. Clemens, ‘Two Kinds of Stuff: The Current Encounter of Social Movements and 
Organisations,’ in Social Movements and Organisation Theory, ed. Gerald F. Davis et al. (New 
York, N.Y: Cambridge University Press, 2005).
fascism and (transnational) social movements
Fascism 10 (2021) 202-227Downloaded from Brill.com 12/19/2023 03:08:02AM
via Open Access. This is an open access article distributed under the terms
of the prevailing CC-BY license at the time of publication.
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

